---
toc: false
badges: false
comments: false
layout: post
description: "How low can you go"
categories: [stream-of-consciousness]
title: "Breaking Things Down"
---
It's a fairly well known idea that, when you want to solve a problem, you can
usually break it down into smaller pieces. It comes up in math and programming
in particular with some frequency. I also find that it's quite helpful in your
daily life. The conceit here is that you are able to do so.

I don't mean that the problem cannot be broken down. I don't know if it's even
possible that a problem exists that way. I certainly wouldn't know how to show
it. What I mean is, what if you suck at it? Or what if you have a particular
bias that is getting in your way?

Now, like most people in my field, I would contend that I don't suck at
breaking problems down. This may even be true for a sub-set of problems.
Namely, I am probably pretty good at breaking down programming problems. But
what about more complex things? Programming problems are necessarily those that
can be expressed in terms of a strict execution. That's what programming is,
telling a computer what to execute. The complexity in software development
_usually_ comes from not actually understanding what you want to have happen.

What I have begun to realize though, is that I have a really nasty bias. When I
try to break down problems while programming, I have no concern about how small
they are to become. A sub-problem is `a - b`? Fine! Excellent event! But when
it comes to things in my life, I have a serious problem with pride.

I can not tell you how many times I have started and stopped various studies. I
have tried to learn Spanish, German, Chinese, Japanese, and Korean at various
points. I have tried to independently study proofs, discrete math, data
structures and algorithms, linear algebra, abstract algebra, game theory, and
calculus. I have attempted to become fluent in programming in Haskell, Rust,
Lua, C, Java, and a myriad other languages.

I suck at actually finishing things.

Why do I suck so bad at this? These are problems, the approach is understood.
Break them down into digestible parts and then execute those parts
consistently.

The problem is me. When I look at something like learning a language, the
_very_ first thing I want to understand is how long it will take. I want to
know that because what I care about is being done. I want to know the language.

Why?

It's a matter of being proud of being able to speak another language.

Why?

It's a matter of being proud of how quickly I learned.

So I stop myself from breaking the problem down to what is actually manageable.
If I did that, then I would be admitting that I was not smart enough to do it
as quickly, or that I needed to actually take time.

This is a terrible, horrible, awful, no good, piece of shit habit. This habit
has probably been the single thing that has actually kept me from achieving the
goals, and enjoying the journeys, that I have attempted in the past. They say
that pride comes before a fall. Well, I've fallen.

So what comes next?

The first step is one that I've already taken. I have started to study
[Proofs](https://www.goodreads.com/book/show/56895723-proofs), which is
something that I had started at least 3 times before. This time though, I have
taken to heart that I am not going to finish it quickly. In fact, I'll be quite
lucky if I can work through it in a year. But you know what? That's ok, because
I'm going to do something out of it every single day. Even if it's just a
single exercise.

I have to fight the urge to say, "I'm not lazy!" No one is calling me lazy. Why
do I think that? Why do I think that the first response to this will be, "You'd
be able to do more if you actually cared/were smarter." Why is that the voice
in my head?

I don't know why I am that much of a dick to myself. But I know I need to stop.
So if you find anything about this to be familiar, maybe you need to stop being
a dick to yourself too.
